So the second issue I want to
talk about is sample size and
want to begin with the psychology
of sample size, essentially.
And this motivates our use of
data to increase samples and
provide some caution on our use
of small intuitive samples.
The first is the example,
this is from a classic research study
where participants were asked
the following vignette.
Your firm has two plants, one large and
one small, which mass produce
a standard computer chip.
Other than the amount they produce,
the two plants are identical
in all essential regards.
Both use the same technology
to produce the same product.
When properly functioning this
technology produces 1% defective items.
Whenever the number of defective items
from one day's production exceeds 2%,
a special note is made in the quality
control log to flag the problem.
At the end of the quarter,
which plant would you expect to have more
flagged days in the quality control log?
So, two identical plants, big and
small, how many fall outside
the quality control acceptable limits?
Everything else about
the plant is the same,
it's just that one is
larger than the other.
Does the small plant have
more of these deviations,
does the large plant have more,
or are they the same?
Because, after all,
they're identical in every other respect.
So, if you ask people this about
22% say the smaller plant,
30% the larger plant, and
then about half say the same.
Because in fact,
all the technologies are the same,
why should have be any different.
What's the right answer?
The right answer is the small plant of
course, because from small samples,
you get greater variation and what
we're talking about here is variation.
These are production outcomes that fall
outside the quality control limits.
Those are variations from expectation.
Small samples necessarily are more
varied and people don't appreciate that.
And this is a major problem for
performance evaluation
because we are apt to draw a too strong
a conclusion from small samples.
Let's look at this in
a little more detail.
Sample means converge to population
means as the sample size increases.
If you've had a statistics course you
might recognize this as the central
limit theorem.
So because this happens
as we get larger and
larger samples the converse is exactly
true that the smaller the sample,
the more likely you see
more extreme values.
So there is a couple example questions.
What are you more likely to see,
a .400 batting average in baseball,
which is a very good batting average,
far higher than we typically see.
Do you see it at the beginning
of the season around May 1st or
towards the end of the season,
September 1st?
Well of course, you're far more likely
to see such an extreme batting average
from a small sample.
The kind of sample you could have
at the beginning of the season than
you would later.
What about hospitals?
Where are you likely to see dramatically
higher percentage of boys than girls, or
vice versa, born on any given day?
A small community hospital,
which might have 4-5 births a day?
Or a large city hospital which
might have 100 births a day.
Where are you more likely to see the
population mean vary in that daily sample?
The small hospital, of course,
could see large variations.
You might have all girls one day,
all boys another day in a small hospital.
There's no way you have
that in a larger hospital.
We emphasize this because it should
give us great caution in what we
say from small samples, but importantly
it shows that we don't have that caution.
We tend to believe that what we see
in a small sample is representative
of the underlying population.
We don't appreciate that a small
sample can bounce around quite a bit.
And not in fact be representative
of the underlying population.
This means that we should be very
careful to not follow our intuition
on what it means when we
only have a small sample.
This is a bias acknowledged
in the literature called,
the law of small numbers,
which is silly of course,
there is no law of small numbers,
it's not like a law of the large numbers.
The small numbers in fact, what makes
them interesting is that there is no law,
they bounce around.
People believe small samples
closely share the properties
of the underlying population,
but in fact they don't.
This means they too readily
infer population's properties,
the average from the samples.
They neglect the role variability plays,
chance plays, in these small samples.
What are the implications?
What are the implications in
your organization?
This is a fundamental issue in
performance evaluation, because often,
maybe even typically, performance
evaluation is on small samples.
The smaller the sample,
the more we have to be cautious what
kind of inference we draw from it.
So this is a place where data
can make a big difference,
this is a place where
by using more sources,
more history, using data as opposed to
just relying on our intuition we had
the chance to collect larger samples.
But I don't want to say
data alone is sufficient,
in fact it's interesting
to note that in academia,
especially in psychology but now it's
expanding to other disciplines as well.
We are discovering that we have been
drawing too strong an inference from even
our academic research.
There's somewhat of a revolution
going on in psychology,
now being picked up in other disciplines,
that the main theme of which is,
we've been drawing too strong an inference
from the samples we've been using,
so this isn't just academia saying be
careful out there, you non-academics.
It's even academics that have had to
learn that we too readily draw inferences
from samples that aren't
really sufficient.
The lesson is almost always get more data,
get bigger samples,
be careful about the inferences you
draw from these small numbers, and
know that we have a bias towards jumping
too quickly based on the small samples.